---
layout: post
title: Final Project Proposal
comments: true
--- 

## Final Project Proposal


I plan to work alone on the final project. The tentative title of my dataset is, “Following Activism through Social Media in Latin America.” My idea for the final project stems from the DH project I collaborated on with one of my classmates from the Media Studies and Digital Humanities seminar I took last semester. Our project entailed gathering information about current activists in Cuba and researching what social media platforms they are currently using. Our criteria were to find a variety of social media influencers, activists, businesses, and/or independent journalist with the caveat that they must be living in Cuba. Then, we searched what major social media platform sites they use, such as YouTube, Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, and Tiktok. Then, we included which province they were from in the survey as well. We collected the data in a spreadsheet, and to keep their anonymity, we gave each one a code name in the spreadsheet to reference them by such as the first activist going as, “A1.” My colleague made a survey with the tool, Qualtrics, which we used to answer the survey for each person, as if they were taking the survey themselves. Afterwards, the site has several features that helped us analyze the data. For example, the site generates a type of bar graph with the responses of each person. For this project, I do not think I will use this tool, but the general idea of colleting data and information regarding social media use and activism in Latin America is where I would like to focus the project. Specifically, I would like to broaden this data by not only using the data I helped find regarding Cuban activists, but those in Mexico, Colombia, Brazil, and Chile as well. I chose these countries because they are just a few leading examples of major protests for social change in the past few years. Above all, the use of social media to spread the word about human rights violations and problematic policy shifts have been increasingly important in these countries in the past seven years. 
For the purposes of this project, I will scrape social media and biographical information from activists, social media influencers, businesses, and journalists in these countries, as I did for the Cuba dataset project. For the sake of time, I plan to gather no more than fifty people for each country, as the data I have for Cuba includes over one hundred people. Although there are a lot of individuals included in this dataset, I split the task with my colleague, so I know that I can feasibly find fifty people for each. If this proves to be more difficult, then I could scale down to twenty per country, which would still give me a variety of potentially 100 activists in the dataset. Overall, I plan to follow the same methodology I used last semester, which is first gathering a list of people on an Excel spreadsheet and separating them into the distinct categories. Then, I will search for them on social media and through google to find the platforms they are active on, with the same caveat that they need to be living in the country; essentially, a Mexican activist living in LA would not count for my data purposes. This is to ensure that my analysis is focused on the Latin American and Caribbean context. 
Eventually, I would like to expand this project to other countries and even to Latinx activists in the United States as well under a separate category. Once I have everything collected in the spreadsheet, I will then use Excel tools such as Pivot tables, line, and bar graphs, and, perhaps, pie charts to interpret the data. These are the questions and concerns I am currently considering; Why are there usually so many activists concentrated in the countries’ capitals? If there is a concentration in smaller towns, what does this say about the human rights violations they are facing in their marginalized communities? What does this add to the greater question of accessibility to the internet and censorship in Latin America? How are some regions politically divided? What role does social media play in enacting social change? As we discussed in class, platforms are ephemeral, how will this change its role in activism, and will this still be an effective tool in 10 years from now?
Similarly, the formulation of this project was inspired by a seminar I am taking regarding art and social movements in Latin America. We have discussed the role of social media in Latin American social movements these past few weeks, particularly in Mexico, Brazil, and Chile due to recent protests. Specifically, we read a few articles by scholar Bernardo Gutierrez, who has written extensively on the role social media plays in global activism and awareness in regards to particular situations in Latin America, such as the #Yosoy132 (#Iam132) student movement in Mexico and the disappearance of 43 students in Ayotzinapa, Mexico in 2014 that sparked outrage across Latin America and the world, with social media acting as a powerful tool to raise awareness about their disappearance (likely targeted by the government). I think that studying the role that social media plays in enacting social change and creating a larger global forum of solidarity and awareness of human rights violations is so important. Many countries in the region are facing similar issues, so there is a sense of cultural understanding and a sense of brotherhood between these countries. Precisely, this use of hashtags brings people together and helps spread the word, even if the person does not live in the same country. In the future, I would like to investigate the use of hashtags and trace them across Twitter to visualize how hashtags in support of students in Mexico or protests in Colombia, for example, can be traced to activists across the Latin American/Caribbean region and the world. As this will be a more involved project, I will just focus on the social media platform use of the main activists from each country for now. All the information I want to focus on finding will be open access online, so I am not as concerned about including the person’s name in my dataset, although I may reconsider this as I move along in my research of each country’s unique political situation. 
Each metadata category will include: The person’s name (for now, a code name for reference later), their location, social media platforms, and occupation/role (influencer, journalist, business, or political activist). Now, a problem I came across last semester was what to do if the person could potentially fit under a number of categories, such as both a political activist and influencer… In this case, I would usually use how they identified on their social media descriptions, so even if they had a decent social media following but said in their Twitter description that they are an activist, I would just use that identity, but there is some interpretive work involved that may become problematic. 
The audience for this project is very broad. I hope that this dataset could eventually help both students and scholars who are interested in studying social movements and activism in Latin America. Likewise, I hope that by including countries with multiple linguistic backgrounds, such as Portuguese in Brazil, Spanish in most countries, and even some activists who mainly use Indigenous languages, can broaden the discussion to be more inclusive of different and similar experiences across the diverse Americas. Therefore, both general enthusiasts and academics could use this dataset alike. 
In terms of datasets already available, I have done some research into the use of social media in Latin America, but this is more particular to academic articles. As I mentioned, in my seminar regarding social movements, art, and media in Latin America, we have read extensively about this and have seen articles that use some basic images of the use of hashtags in different countries, but I have not been able to find a dataset exactly like this one. There are websites and tools, such as “Statista” that shows social media use by platform and age in Latin America. You can choose a platform, such as Facebook/Messenger and see a bar chart with the demographic distribution by age in various countries. This could be an interesting starting point for my research to get a general sense of what platforms should be used more for a specific age group, and how this relates to the information I may find. Essentially, there is a lot of data about the specific use of social media in Latin America, but not specific to the individuals using them, their role in society, and where they specifically come from. In this sense, I hope to add something new and meaningful to the field. 


