---
layout: post
title: Lab 6 report
comments: true
--- 

## Lab 6 notebook!
Savannah Saavedra 
Lab 6 
 What do you see as the most important or significant aspect of this dataset for scholars, researchers, and/or teachers? 
This dataset is so important because of its striking visual aspect. Students, scholars or teachers can all see the data “in action.” This reminds me of some tools I explored on Voyant for lab 4, such as the bubble lines and the scatterplot, which put the data into a new perspective through visual means. Specifically, there are two, what they call, “volumes” of data on the map of the United States. The first one shows with dots that are large or small, the ICE facilities not in use (smaller ones) and the ones used since 2014 (larger ones). By having the two different sized dots, we can truly get a sense of where these facilities are most prevalent and just the sheer number that are still in use. Furthermore, this can be useful for research of a specific demographic or geographic area in the U.S., and how this impacts the number of ICE facilities still in use. Clearly, there are a lot still functioning around the Texas-Mexico border, Southern California, New York, and right here in Florida. Therefore, we can draw the conclusion that migrants who arrive to the U.S. are not allowed the opportunities they should and are falling victims to the broken system. The second “volume” or graph shows the map of the U.S. in different colors, indicating ICE awards given to different congressmen and women since 2014, each color denotes either Republican or Democrat or some very few blocks of color for “no rep. in Congress.” This adds another layer to the data because we can see the insane amount of money these members of Congress receive from ICE, which brings to light other ethical issues as well. If a student or academic was researching the link between more funding received from ICE and detention rates, this would be the ideal map to look at. Overall, I think the most important aspect is this strong visual component of incorporating data through different colors and sized shapes to allow the public to make connections. However, there is one map that is a beacon of hope, which shows allied organizations around the country and those in Mexico as well. This also shows a correlation in location between the highest density of ICE facilities and the concentration of allied organizations.
Additionally, what do you see as the limits of this dataset? What is not included, and why, and what are the potential consequences of these omissions?
The limits of this dataset could be not including more information about where the migrants are coming from in each area, what the funds from ICE are exactly used for, and updated information for the maps, such as updated numbers for the ICE detention centers, etc. However, overall, the dataset is very complete, and these are more personal questions I had relating to the data. For example, most people looking at the data could assume that most migrants that are detained come from Mexico or Central America, which is largely true, but there are also people from Africa, Asia, etc. who are also largely detained. It would be interesting to see the rate of detention for immigrants from certain regions or countries over others, to show any potential biases the system has to favor one group over another. Likewise, in terms of the funds given to the congressmen from ICE, it would be interesting to get a sense what they use these funds for and how this negatively impacts the people in these facilities. Are people sent to the centers with more funding or to congressional districts more funded by ICE treated significantly differently? I know this project was completed in 2018, so it would be interesting to see updated data as well. 
You may also consider what it would take to remedy this situation: Is it possible to collect or include what has been overlooked? Why or why not? How do the creators of this dataset describe or understand its limitations or boundaries?
I think it is easily possible to include the data that has been overlooked, especially updating the data. I know this project is to get a sense of the immigration situation back in 2018, but I truly hope they are able to continue their work and update it soon. It may be more difficult to specifically find information as to why certain congressmen received significantly more money and how it was used but showing a visualization of nationalities of detainees in each center would add another layer to the data. This would probably not be too hard to find but could be extremely time consuming. The creators of the dataset do mention that they relied a lot on volunteer work and that there are always potential errors in the data. Although I was left with some questions or uncertainties after reviewing the data, this was a very detailed and well-done project. This is a perfect example of the human connection and social justice lens that digital humanities can provide us. This idea reminds me of several readings we had from Data Feminism, such as chapter 4, “What gets counted, counts” and chapter 5, “Unicorns, Janitors, Ninjas, Wizards, and Rock Stars.” The importance of counting data responsibly is so important here, because they are literally showing how people’s lives are impacted by being viewed just as a number. The data shown on the map is purely by numbers (frequency of centers in an area, for example), so our whole visual understanding of the data is based on numerical, quantified values. Likewise, the graphs they actually show in chapter 5, with the “bus stop eviction map” actually looks very similar to the “Torn apart/Separados” map. These are very effective ways to visually show inequality. Many people may not want to or have time to read an article about these issues but looking at visual aids like these are incredibly effective in getting the message across. Although working with datasets of such a large scale may provide problems in effectively processing all of the numbers and the ability to analyze everything in an efficient way, there is power in the numbers. As D’Ignazio and Klein so beautifully suggest, “A single data scientist wizard will never defeat the matrix of domination alone, no matter how powerful their spells might be. But a well-designed, data-driven, participatory process, one that centers the standpoints of those most marginalized, empowers project participants, and builds new relationships across lines of social difference—well, that might just have a chance” (last paragraph of text). When data is put into the right hands of people who deeply care about the issues, then it becomes a way to enact real social change. We can’t change a situation or help people in need, if we aren’t aware of the issues, which digital humanities can help us with. 


