Lab 3 notebook entry (week 4)

My idea was to create an expression that includes nothing before the alphabetical characters, therefore, I put the “.* before and after the titles. 
The first simple expression I created: ((.*)A-Z(.*)A-Z) did not work. 
Therefore, this was the second one I tried out: ([“A-Z”]), which only highlighted the first letter of every word in the text. So, I realized that I needed to expand my expression further and highlight the quotations, so I tried the following: ( ["] A-Z ["] ). This did end up highlighting the second quotation after the word, “Bilingüe". However, I am not sure why it did not count the other quotations at the beginning of other words. I tried the same expression again taking away or adding spaces, but it still wasn’t registering the other ones. 
I decided to move onto the next step of the lab, since it was recognizing at least some of the quotation marks. 
For the fourth step, I put the original expression I created in for the substitution, to try and get rid of them altogether: ([.*]A-Z[.*]) however, the substitution table did not recognize this. 

Working with regular expressions this week was a challenge that encouraged me to reach outside my comfort zone and problem solve. Although I was not able to complete the entire task, I was able to get more familiar with the site and how it works. This week’s lab made me think of the article by Julia Flanders and Fotis Jannidis, “Data modeling in a Digital Humanities context” that we read for this week. The article discusses the use of data in humanities research, which is often overlooked as irrelevant by humanities scholars and students alike. This lab shows how we can use digital humanities tools to shape our research, and even help us discover new information that would have been unavailable with just a quick Google search. For example, if we are searching a data base or online repository, using a regular expression to pick through the search results or data helps narrow our focus to the items we’re looking for, as well as enhance our search techniques. Likewise, using data models in the humanities can help researchers understand historical data better, in specialized cases, it may also provide additional ways of learning about the data set, since it shows immediately the possible patterns the data can assume and also may reveal some of the assumptions underlying the data design” (Flanders and Jannidis, 7). Although historians or literary scholars may not always associate their work with mathematics, statistics, or science, they can use these fields and data to give their research a greater depth and to find patterns that they may have been previously unaware of. 
This recalls the other articles we have read these past weeks as well, such as Chapter 5 in Data Feminism we read for last week. It is important to critically look at data, because as humanities scholars we often create an assumption based on the knowledge we gather regarding a text or historical time period. By modeling data in an effective way, we can better gauge the complexities of our research and make more responsible conclusions. Flanders and Jannidis also suggest the following, “And within the academy, the stakes for digital humanists are highest of all, since their research concerns not only the knowing and critical use of data models, media, and tools, but also their critical creation” (12). Precisely, using tools such as regular expressions can facilitate the creation of more precise and relevant data to work with. In my own research, I can use these tools to separate texts from a list to the period I am most concerned with, or I can look for texts that are specific to one author over another by organizing the data in a certain way. I am interested in working with historical texts spanning 19th-20th century Latin America, so this will help me clean historical data I have to be more efficient in the texts or documents that would be most useful for the project at hand. 
Before working on the lab for this week, I wasn’t aware that this software program existed; however, I realize how valuable it is for humanities research. As the Flanders and Jannidis article suggests, data and the humanities are very intertwined fields and data research, and modeling is becoming increasingly more important. A large portion of the success scholars have is based on the quality of their research and how it is created and organized, which is increasingly dependent on online tools and programs. The digital humanities are bridging the historical gap between technology and the humanities, by showing that the two fields were always connected and can enhance each other. We can also use the data we create to help other scholars, both future and present, who could benefit from our research and the way we organize and model it. This creates a more collaborative field, in which everyone benefits. Although I have not entirely mastered RegEX, I hope to become more familiar with it to be able to utilize in my future research to both find information more effectively and to share/model my data. 




