Lab entry: February 9, 2022
2) The Post45 HathiTrust dataset was interesting in that, once again, we were able to access a lot of different information about a certain topic to analyze in the pivot table. When I first entered the site, I was overwhelmed at first with all the information, but I found the site relatively easy to navigate and find information. However, there were certain categories I didn’t quite understand at first, such as the “juvenileprob” and “nonfictionprob,” but I was able to find out what the categories meant by selecting the question mark icon. This confirmed that we do not always know how to categorize data, and it may not always be accurate, but there is some transparency regarding this issue. Overall, I enjoyed exploring all the information on the site, although some of the categories left me wanting to know more, such as those with several “N/A” entries, I am interested to learn/explore more from this site. 
3) Data has the potential to show us amazing things about how our world currently and has historically operated. Specifically, data shown in charts or graphs, when done appropriately and objectively, can give us a visual sense of the magnitude of horrific historical events or current global crisis. This recalls two of the readings for this week, Chapter 5, “Unicorns, Janitors, Ninjas, Wizards, and Rock Stars” from Data Feminism, and “Why you should care about OCR” by Ryan Cordell. To begin with, chapter 5 in Data Feminism discusses the housing crisis in this country, specifically in places with increasingly high rent, such as San Francisco, and the burden this causes on working-class people to afford housing. The importance of collaboration and pluralism, as they put it, demonstrates how the digital humanities can help shape our conceptions of society and enact social change through working to show the disparities existent in our societies against historically marginalized communities; “A single data scientist wizard will never defeat the matrix of domination alone, no matter how powerful their spells might be. But a well-designed, data-driven, participatory process, one that centers the standpoints of those most marginalized, empowers project participants, and builds new relationships across lines of social difference—well, that might just have a chance” (last paragraph of page on website). Along the same note, in order to create this domino effect of social change through DH projects, there must also be a way to access written sources that may be both illegible and in multiple languages, which is where OCR comes in useful. 
The OCR tool allows data scientists and humanists alike to have access to materials that were not previously available to them electronically and can house a variety of texts in multiple languages. These texts now searchable through Google Books is a breakthrough for easier access to scholars globally (that is, if internet access is not a problem). The importance of these two texts in terms of our lab for this week shows both information that could be related to the OCR, in that a scholar could look objectively at the data provided in the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade, for example, and create a chart or table to study their findings. Then, they could use OCR sponsored search engines to find primary information regarding their findings that could relate to the journal of one of the captains of a voyage, which could very likely be written in other languages like Spanish, Portuguese, or French. The data shows the magnitude of the slave trade, in that you can see the numbers clearly presented before you. It’s easy to read something abstractly about the social and cultural consequences of this phenomena, but it is another, I would argue even more powerful tool, to visually see those numbers displayed. These numbers can also give us more insight. 
Specifically, the spreadsheet of the Trans-Atlantic Slave trade shows a variety of data categories, such as the number of voyages for each year, point of origin for the voyage, principal place of slave purchase, etc. Essentially, we can get a better sense of what was going on economically during this extensive period spanning nearly over the 16th-early 19th centuries. If for example, one year had a particularly high number of voyages, that could indicate some type of economic growth in Europe, to fund those trips. Likewise, if there was a downfall, especially towards the beginning of the 19th century, that reflects the independence uprisings in many Latin American countries, although slavery ended very late in some countries of the hemisphere, such as Brazil, in which slavery was only officially abolished in 1888. By integrating the pivot tables into the spreadsheet, using a combination of data categories, we can visually see these correlations between the places of disembarkation and frequency of voyages, destinations, etc. 
Although data should be objective as we discussed last week, there are circumstances in which the data really, “speaks for itself.” Such as in circumstances with the Trans-Atlantic Slave trade, data can be used to show historical circumstances and the magnitude of this very problematic endeavor that spanned over several centuries. Using OCR resources could be useful in gathering texts in other languages, as this directly relates to the history of the Americas and Caribbean, home to a plethora of language. Above all, DH scholars can approach this with the mindset of global change and awareness to marginalized communities, as addressed in Data Feminism. 
